South Africa has made a new application
to the international court of justice or
the icj asking it to prevent famine in
the Gaza Strip South Africa is seeking
an emergency order to compel Israel to
allow more Aid into the territory
warning that Palestinians in Gaza are
facing starvation Israel has launched an
offensive in Gaza to root out Hamas
militants following the terror attacks
of October the 7th South Africa has
urged the court to order all parties to
seize hostilities and releasee all
hostages and
detainees for more on that our
correspondent Diane Haw joins us from
Johannesburg Diane good morning this is
the second time South Africa has asked
for the court to take measures on the
war in Gaza they got turned down last
time do they have a better chance of
success this
time well this time around the the focus
of the application ation is somewhat
different with the uh earlier the the
late January application South Africa
was focusing on the situation in the
area of Rafa uh saying that the court
should prevent Israel from entering that
territory the court felt that the
measures that were already in place were
strong enough to deal with any situation
that arises there now um the the the
application brought by South Africa it
comes after Israel has actually
submitted um the timeline for Israel to
submit its report to the international
uh court of justice on what it has done
uh to ensure that life is is preserved
and also the focus is different looking
more on the human humanitarian aspects
um of Aid and and making sure that Aid
actually reaches people across um the
the the area of Gaza what exactly is uh
South Africa expecting the court will
will do this time around because last
time the court I think asked Israel to
take preventive action when it came to
that genocide case that South Africa had
filed what is South Africa expecting the
court will do this time
around well South Africa is being more
um explicit it seems in its request and
saying that there needs to actually be a
halt an immediate halt um to the
conflict in the area and it's also uh
requesting the release of all hostages
um which would not only apply um you
know to Israel but it would also apply
if the court were to order this uh to
the the the Hamas uh group and any other
groups that are holding hostages now
South Africa is saying that it believes
that Israel hasn't complied with the
initial court order um and it would
obviously have to motivate why it says
that um it says that Israel's actions
over the period since the initial court
order and now do not demonstrate that it
has complied with that court order so in
a way it wants the court to examine in
Israel's actions in this period as well
as to make a further uh step by
requesting um or ordering that there
should be a halt to the conflict itself
how much support is there in South
Africa for the government's efforts at
the
icj in in South Africa I would say there
is quite a lot of support of course
there are different perspectives uh from
all different walks of life but we
regularly do see protests taking place
usually on a Friday and Saturday where
there are large groups Gathering
particularly in the Western Cape um
where there's a large Muslim Community
um where people are requesting that um
you know South Africa should continue
this and also saying that there should
be other interventions not only from
South Africa but when it comes to the
International Community um I think it is
important to also note that there have
been other countries that that have
expressed their support for example
Nicaragua has requested to join the the
broader case um at the icj and a number
of other countries in uh the the Arab
League have also expressed their support
thanks so much for that our
correspondent Diane Hawker reporting
from Johannesburg
there